# 2023 Xena Summer Projects

I am once again running summer projects related to the Lean theorem prover. This summer they will be in Lean 4. My UROP students will be involved, as will my Mary Lister McCammon student. If you are not officially enrolled as doing a UROP under me, but if you are a mathematics undergraduate who wants to get involved remotely, then reach out. The projects run through July and August.

In the past many projects have been of the form "choose a theorem and teach it to Lean", and no doubt there will
still be some projects of that form. However, for a change this year, I thought that we could focus on
*group projects*, and also focus on projects which finish up as something which *other people can interact
with*. There are two kinds of projects which fit the bill: projects which make a *game*, and projects which make
some kind of *interactive text*. 

## Games

The [Natural number game](https://www.ma.imperial.ac.uk/~buzzard/xena/natural_number_game/) was written in Lean 3, but is in 
the process of being [ported to Lean 4](https://adam.math.hhu.de/).
Parts of it need extensive rewriting; in particular Proposition world and Function world are going to be removed (meaning that
all the tactics relevant to inequality world and the advanced addition and multiplication world need to be taught in a different
way), and other new worlds (even/odd world, prime number world, who knows what else) could be added.

There is plenty of potential for other games too. Games like the 
[Complex number game](https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/complex-number-game) never made it to the web,
but they could be translated into Lean 4 and then put online. Billy Miao wrote a [filter game](https://github.com/Biiiilly/filter)
as part of his M2R project! This needs to be translated into Lean 4 as well. There are plenty of other games that
one could imagine (perhaps a group theory game going up to Sylow's theorems? A real number game?) The art with games
is finding the right levels and putting them in the right order to make it playable. You also need to do lots of beta testing, 
maybe using other project students as your guinea pigs.

## Interactive texts

People in the Lean 4 community have been experimenting with 
[interactive web pages](https://www.imo.universite-paris-saclay.fr/~patrick.massot/Examples/ContinuousFrom.html) where
proofs can be explored (click on the ovals and the plus-in-a-circles). In Lean 3 we also have Lean/Latex hybrid projects such as the
[Liquid Tensor Experiment](https://leanprover-community.github.io/liquid/).
It might be interesting to see what can be done now. And what better way to find out than by formalising
some mathematical texts and seeing what happens.

One text in particular I'm interested in is Prof Martin Liebeck's book "A concise introduction to pure mathematics". Last year we 
translated some of the exercises into Lean 3 (see [here](https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/m1fexplained/)). More of the 
exercises need to be translated (it would be great if we could solve all of them!) but I'm wondering if we can somehow also make the
solutions more interactive. I am also open to the idea of translating other mathematical texts, for example some Imperial 1st year 
or 2nd year course notes? Or full solutions to Imperial problem sheets?

## Geometry

I occasionally give talks in schools, and I usually talk about Peano's axioms (and prove things like 2+2=4). I would like to develop
a geometry talk where I go through basic school (GCSE level) stuff like circle theorems. Lean has all these theorems now, thanks to 
Joseph Myers, and Lean 4 also has the ability to display graphics in the infoview, so we should be able to put these things together
to make a really nice Lean geometry talk. This could either be an interactive text, or a game, or something else (a live demo) but I
think it's definitely worth doing. If we can somehow use Lean 4 widgets to have some kind of interactive "angle at center is twice
angle at circumference" goal where you can drag the points like on Geogebra (this should certainly be possible)  but with the added
possibility of being able to formally prove angle chasing arguments! There are people who know how to make Lean draw pictures and who would be happy to help.

## Other things

If you do not want to get involved in one of these group activities then you can still do things the "old-fashioned" way, choosing
a project (e.g. "prove theorem X") and working on it over the summer. It doesn't even matter if theorem X is already proved
in Lean's maths library. I've just realised that I'm getting a bit bored of those projects. Perhaps something I would find interesting though would be the formalisation and PRing to mathlib4 of some hard algebraic number theory or arithmetic geometry which is needed for the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.

## Dates

The summer projects run for 8 weeks through July and August. I am away at a conference 10th to 14th July, 
and away on a family holiday 14th-18th August. The last day of the projects will be 25th August; on Thursday 24th
we will have a mini-conference on Discord in the afternoon, where students present the stuff they've been working on to the
rest of the group. The general rule is that I will be at Imperial in person in the MLC from 9-5 on Mondays, and on the Xena
Project Discord in voice chat 10-5 on Thursdays during this time, but there are some changes because of my travels.
You can get an invite to the Xena Project Discord via Imperial student hub. 

The first session is Monday 3rd July, I'll be in the MLC from 9 and I'll give an introductory talk at 11 in Huxley 139 (which I'll
also try to live stream on the Discord but not sure about audio :-/ ). The full timetable for the summer is on the Xena Project google calendar which you
can view via [this link](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/embed?src=l26hcfbgvh1ba0i216mf9l0llk%40group.calendar.google.com&ctz=Europe%2FLondon)
or [this link](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/ical/l26hcfbgvh1ba0i216mf9l0llk%40group.calendar.google.com/public/basic.ics) (iCal format)

## London Learning Lean

I run a weekly hybrid seminar Thursdays 4-5 called "London Learning Lean", which will start again in October. If any person or group feels like they could give a talk (of any length up to 1 hour) on the stuff they did over the summer, then they should just let me know. You can check out past talks [on the YouTube playlist](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UykGFDVfQNA&list=PLVZep5wTamMmqv34JnrNC2AgjfPoh_LN8)

## Questions?

Ask on the Xena Project Discord, on the `#2023-summer-projects` channel. It's a private server but you can get an invite via the Imperial student hub Discord server.
